- Hello, YouTube. Hello, Brett. Hello, Christian.
- Hey, Michael.
- Hey.
- Hey. Thanks for being here.
Looking forward to this podcast.
So yeah, let's just kick it off.
Those of you out in the audience,
please put out some questions for us
if you have thoughts and feedback.
Brett, Christian, welcome to Talk Python to Me.
- Thanks for having us.
- Yeah, thank you for signing up for me.
- Yeah, Christian, it's great to have you here.
That's super.
And Brett, I think you may have been on before.
Memory recollects, yes, I have been on it.
I have been on--
- I love having you on.
It's always fun to talk about stuff.
And it always seems like somehow we touch on WebAssembly.
I think one of the very last conferences I went to
was PyCon and we recorded like on the expo floor
talking about WebAssembly.
So maybe we'll find a way to get back to that.
- I do remember that conversation very distinctly actually.
- Yeah, that was fun.
- Yeah.
- All right, well, even though you've been on a lot,
maybe just real quick, tell people about yourself.
You've been Python core deving for a long time
and something to do with VS Code and Python as well.
So tell people about that.
- This stuff.
Yeah, just keep it short and sweet.
I am the dev manager for the Python experience
and VS Code at Microsoft.
I've been a Python core developer for 19 years
and I've been a member of the Python steering council
since its inception back three and some odd months ago,
I think, I don't even keep track of when that started.
- Yes.
- And that's me.
- Awesome.
Christian, how about you tell people about yourself?
- Hi, I'm Chris.
So I work for Red Hat, you may have seen that.
So-
- You have a Red Hat and you work for Red Hat.
That's awesome.
- Yeah, at Red Fedora, by the way.
So I work for Red Hat
and security engineering department.
I work on something that could be easiest described
as a open source implementation of Active Directory.
I'm currently working on just containerizing
all the things and getting that up to the internet.
So that's a fun one.
As part of my security work,
I also do security for CPython.
So I take care of some of the models
and I'm part of the security response team.
Been in Codeveloper for, I think 14 years,
give or take, probably.
Long time, eventually.
So I started doing Python like 20 years ago.
That was fun.
- Awesome.
- Yeah, anything else you wanna know about me?
- No, I would just like to say thank you
on behalf of everyone for keeping our machines
from getting rooted, 'cause we're running Python web apps,
that's pretty awesome.
- You're welcome.
- Seriously though, how often are there
meaningful security problems in CPython?
I know that one of the big talking points
about moving away from Python 2 was like,
well, if you don't come along for the ride,
you're not gonna get security updates.
But how often is that a big problem really?
How often are there problems where a CV is filing
and like, oh, we gotta jump on this and quickly.
- So the last version of Python that came out
before we had the emergency release for the bugfix.
So the 3.10.2 I think, had like 11 or 13 CVs,
although only one that directly affected
was in the Python code.
So we also ship a bunch of extensions,
like we ship a library to parse XML,
but had like six or eight ZVEs.
We had a Zlib fix, we had something else.
So it's not just Python core that's affected,
but since we bundle and ship several libraries
with CPython, you know,
especially Windows and the Mac installers,
you may be also affected.
If you have Linux distros,
they typically have their libraries de-bundled
and use system libraries and they update them
out of bounds, but yeah.
- Okay, well that's actually more than I realized
to be honest, that's, you don't hear too often
about it being a big public problem,
like, you know, log4j or something like that.
- Yeah, I'd say typically the CVEs we end up dealing with
is the bundling that Christian mentioned, right?
Like, Christian does a lot of work to make sure
we're constantly compatible with the newest versions
of OpenSSL.
So for instance, on 2.7, had you not moved over,
you're gonna have to do the work to be able to use OpenSSL.
I think 3 is the newest one coming out.
So that's the real kind of concern,
unless we screwed up as core devs and we have a nasty CVE,
it's usually something we depend on
that typically triggers this kind of thing.
- I see, interesting.
Yeah, yeah.
Well, speaking of the standard library and stuff,
Let's start out by talking about Python just on GitHub
because I think maybe the time of yours releases
it might be already a week old,
but Brett, you were one of the big proponents
of moving CPython and the Python organization
over to GitHub, right?
- Yeah, I drove that move.
- Thank you, that's awesome.
It's so nice to be over there,
but one of the challenges has been that bug.python.org
has kind of been its own island,
especially since this move, right?
- Yeah, so when I helped move us off of material to get
and thus move us to GitHub for pull requests and stuff,
I basically had to choose my battles.
And the battle I chose was changing
our version control system and no longer self-hosting
our version control system.
I was not up mentally to the challenge
of also trying to move the development team
over to a new issue tracker as well.
So I purposely punted on that problem
and tackled the one I thought I was capable of handling
and dealing with, and that's why we ended up
with this somewhat split personality problem
of Python being a GitHub for pull requests
and for code hosting, but not for issue tracking.
- Well, Kito said yesterday, I believe it was yesterday,
maybe the day before yesterday on Twitter,
that, hey, it's happening, the bugs,
Python.org's migrating over,
and then it got delayed until April 1st.
So hopefully that happens really soon.
But what was really surprising to me was just
how long that migration is, right?
It's not like a copy the files over,
get init, get commit,
or the equivalent of the, for the issues.
It's days to migrate all the issues.
- Yeah, so there's tricky parts to this.
I mean, one is we're getting internal help from GitHub,
but obviously it's not common to move issue trackers
into GitHub per se, like a lot of projects,
I think just start on GitHub and have for like a decade.
So the idea of moving over is kind of a new thing.
And on top of it, not very many projects
have the volume of issues historically
to move over that we have, right?
Like we have like 7,000 open issues, I think alone.
So the volume there also causes an extra overload.
And because GitHub, as I said, they have some internal tooling for this,
but it's not like something that they work on month over month.
It's there and we're using it, but it's not optimized
because it's just not a typical business concern,
which totally makes sense.
How often do you have a project of our size and age
wanting to migrate over like this?
Yeah, I think just--
Yeah, go ahead, Christian.
Just pull up the numbers.
So we have almost 59,000 bugs in total on the bug tracker.
And almost 8,000 open.
Yeah, 7,700.
Yeah.
And trying to translate over as much metadata as possible is computationally expensive,
right?
Because what we have to do is we have to generate a dump and the dump has a different data model,
And it's a different data model on top of it.
Correct.
For instance, one of the reasons this took so long
was we had to first decide we wanted to do this,
convince people that we should do it,
find someone, it was at some Maladi initially,
to come in and kind of figure out how to map things
and get things working.
And then earlier this year, we had Wukash step in
and help out as well as the developer in residence
to help push this over the finish line.
And on top of all that, having to process all that data,
export it to the right format,
and then have GitHub's tools pull it in
and not cause a strain on their system
because this is a lot of data to suddenly dump in
and have to replicate across their entire cluster.
So there's a reason why it takes so long.
And we also don't want to have it happen during,
'cause we're probably going to be running
at a low process priority,
which also means we want to do it
on a Friday in the afternoon so that it's over the weekend
and not when GitHub gets hit the hardest.
So there's a lot of coordination going on.
And as we all know, GitHub had some stability issues
the other week, and so they just said,
can we just wait till a little later
to make sure that it's all good and solid
and everything looks good.
So the plan is April 1st.
- Excellent, very exciting.
- Yeah, and we also have--
- Yeah, go ahead, Christian, what do you think about this?
- A good track count actually break GitHub.
I'm not sure if anybody attended the live stream.
Pablo's changed the master branch to main branch
we renamed the default branch, but yeah, we broke it up
and it took a while to recover from that too.
So since our repos are so gigantic,
so we started with ZVS, then moved to SVN subversion,
then went, broke all this stuff to Mercurial
and then to Git and I'm not sure how many revisions
we have in the tip, but it's gigantic.
- Yeah, so to be, just to be ultra clear here,
Thanks to GitHub for working with us directly.
And actually they donated money to help us make this all happen.
So they've been really great partners in all this.
Thanks to Etsio for getting this started.
Marietta for the initial pep, by the way,
and even starting this conversation.
And for Rukosh to stepping in and helping get it finished.
Yeah, definitely a team effort.
A lot of people involved, and thanks to all of them.
So Tushar out in the audience is joking,
is this why GitHub has been crashing the whole week?
But Christian, you were joking, like maybe,
did you guys actually cause problems?
Not that I know of specifically, but I also,
yeah, not that I know of.
- Yeah, okay.
- I hope not.
I apologize to the world if we did somehow.
- Well, it wouldn't be the first time.
There's been other outages and other crazy things.
- Yeah, and unfortunately at our size,
we would not be the first time.
- Yeah, for sure.
I think there was a huge DDoS attack not too long ago.
Anyway, also came out in the audience asks,
assuming there are usernames and email addresses
on the original issue.
So like, what was, how much did you all care
about having fidelity across those?
And you know, this could have been an opportunity
to just say, you know what's awesome?
Command A, archive in your inbox to just kind of catch up
and be okay, like you could have just dropped in.
So we're just gonna start over.
If it's important, it'll find its way here.
If it's not, then it wasn't.
- Yeah, I mean, there has been talk about this.
There's varying opinions on how important
the digital archives are.
Like, do we need to move all the closed issues over?
Should we only move open?
Like we actually discussed this
when we were looking at potentially up to a week
to do the migration versus the two or three days
it's actually gonna take now.
But everyone has different opinions
of how important the history is.
To specifically answer the question though
from the audience about usernames,
as long as you have your GitHub username
attached to your bugs.python.org account,
that should map over.
- And you've gotten to-- - I don't think--
- I think we're-- - You're supposed to get it
in there?
- Yeah, I don't remember if we map email to email,
there might be some privacy issues.
I can't remember where that all landed.
Like lawyers were consulted and I was out of the loop
on those, but I believe if you at least have specified
your GitHub username on bugs.python.org,
we will be able to do the map.
- Yeah, fantastic.
All right, well, thank you both for the update on that.
It's not exactly why we're here, but it's so timely
and I think you're both involved in it and stuff like that.
So quite cool to see it coming along.
I personally really think that it's fantastic
that CPython is on GitHub.
I know it's not that different if it was, say,
self-hosted Git or GitLab or even Mercurial or SVN,
but there's just something about it.
It seems more open to contributors,
given just sort of the status of GitHub,
where a lot of people seem to hang out
and the whole PR flow and those kinds of things.
- That was part of the motivation.
Somewhat ironically, we actually had to teach
a bunch of core devs how to use GitHub
as part of the migration.
'Cause I mean, to be fair,
some decent chunk of the core devs
don't contribute to other open source.
I mean, Python alone is a big enough of a project
that it absorbs a large chunk of your time.
So they just didn't have to know
how to do any other open source development
for a different project other than however Python did it.
And if we weren't on GitHub,
they just didn't have a need to.
So, plus we also did the move a while ago.
So I think it's coming close to a decade at this point.
So it was also a different time.
- Indeed, indeed.
All right, so let's start by maybe talking about,
speaking of different times,
let's start and talk about the standard library
from, maybe you guys could approach it
from a historical perspective to start.
'Cause we're gonna focus on stuff that's in there
that maybe should be removed
in the benefits of taking it out and stuff,
but when it got put in, it seemed like a good idea.
So when I think about Python, one of the key phrases I hear,
I don't know its origin,
but the batteries included story, right?
Python comes with batteries included
and then it's frameworks did like Django and so on.
And it's a huge selling point, right?
This is a language that has a bunch of support built in.
Right?
- Yeah, so the rough history, for those who don't know,
Python went public February of 1991, right?
So 32 years ago, it's predates Linux, right?
Like it's really crazy when you look at the history
of when projects came out, how long Python's been around.
But the other thing to think about is
who was on the internet or the worldwide web even in 1991?
Like who even had like internet or even a modem back then?
And so what that led to was people contributing things
to Python that Guido would look at and go,
"Oh yeah, that's useful."
And then just pull it in and put it in the standard library.
And it grew and grew and grew.
And then at some point in the nineties,
like there was a website called the Vaults of Parnassus,
which had animated gifts of wall sconces
with little candles with the flickering, whatever,
like totally bit like you can imagine what this is like.
This is back in GeoCity stage, right?
And that's where you went to get your code.
And all it was was zip files of Python code.
There's no concept of wheels or conda packages
or anything like this,
they were literally just zip files of code
that you just unpacked and just copied over the directory
that contained the other Python code
and you just vendored everything.
There was nothing else.
And so--
- And stuff moving stuff around the internet
was slow as well back then.
I mean, a lot of people were on dial up.
- Yeah.
- Internet made it--
- You were blazing fast with your 56K modem
if you were lucky enough to have that, right?
So that meant that it was really hard
to find high quality code out there, right?
And getting done and put up and all that.
So things just kept getting added
and added to the standard library
and it kept getting bigger and bigger
and continued to be useful.
And it was just a different time, right?
Like hell, not even everyone in the United
even had a web browser, right?
Like I remember when I first found the net.
- Didn't Mosaic come out in '93?
- Yeah, and actually one of the very first
graphical web browsers was Grail
written by Guido in Python, right?
Like if you go look up the history, right?
It was like, I think Guido missed
being the first graphical browser
for like months or something crazy.
There's a weird history in Python in terms of early web.
But what this all led to, right?
Like, and I remember by the way,
when I first got on the internet,
it was Usenet and Gopher.
It wasn't even the World Wide Web, right?
That was still AOL days back then,
for those of you can date yourself based on that knowledge.
It was a different time.
It was a bit of a sidebar, like things were so basic back then. But at the same time,
there was so much like imagination for what could be. Because so much of it was unmaterialized.
And you're like, I can see where this is gonna go.
Yeah, I intend was even much more expensive in Germany. So I know that until, so I was lucky
away to university in 2000. But before when I was living with my parents, I had to pay the internet
by the minute. So, local calls were not free in Germany. You had to pay for them. And I know that
like end of '99, I was lucky. I paid like several hundreds a month to have like a free,
like a persistent internet connection, really persistent. But I used the only phone line we had,
but I didn't have to pay by the minute, but I paid in bulk. It's super expensive. That's why
lots of people... I started actually using mailboxes, so I'll dial in mailboxes.
They're like this weird concept that you were sending messages, you push the message, and
later in life, the mailboxes will call other mailboxes. They do this Unix to Unix copy to
copy the messages around, and next day you would receive the message from a friend who was living
like in a different city.
- Yeah, I remember that was amazing.
Like all the back ends, we just kind of sync up
and it was like sort of this distributed,
like the PBS world and some of the other stuff.
Yeah, incredible.
- So, it made a lot of sense back in the days
to have all the useful bits and pieces in Python.
So that's why the library was so big.
And so we have just Python code, it was easy,
but we also have like lots of C code and C extension.
And these were really complicated to compile and build.
So you had to make files and figure out which compilers
and libraries you need.
And building things for Windows was super painful
for the Windows people that they had to get
the right compiler version.
- They had to figure out their VC Vars bat setup.
- Yeah, and each Python version had like its requirements
for different like Visual Studio versions.
- Yeah, so I think that's, you know,
people get a sense of the time, right?
Like at that time, it was amazing for Python to say,
as much as we can get into the standard library,
it's gonna be a benefit to people
because if you need to parse CSS,
color codes, hex color codes, and it's built in,
that's a bonus, right?
There's not the idea of pip and fast internet
and all those things, right?
or even distutils, right?
Like as Christian was saying,
compilation was hard enough as it is.
So getting something in the standard library
ported over to C code for performance was a huge deal.
So it's not even just distribution,
it was literally just creating these things.
It was difficult.
- Sure.
- So it just shows it how far we've come, right?
That these were even problems that we used to have.
- Yeah, it's pretty interesting.
Do you think if Python were designed today from scratch,
you know, this is the kind of the language you want.
It would be packaged in the same way that it is now.
Like, would it have a large standard library?
- No, but that would be controversial.
- I agree with Brett, yeah.
- Yeah, well, we're just, why we're friends
and why we wrote this pet that we're gonna be talking about.
- Exactly. - Oh, we are friends.
Thank you.
- Oh, we went to a movie together,
one of the PyCons of Portland, man.
Yeah, and we are friends on Nintendo Network.
- Yeah, it's on Switch, yes.
Yeah, but no, so I don't think so.
Like if you look at more recent languages
like Rust and Go and stuff,
they have a much more targeted standard library.
They're able to lean on the community
and people seem fine with it.
And I think that's a key thing is
we get to learn the less,
people have gotten to learn lessons from us,
but we also can learn,
we would have been able if we started now
telling lessons from other people.
I think that'd be one of them is targeted center library
that is very tight and very targeted,
very for it, very stable,
and that's much easier to maintain
would probably be the good way to go.
'Cause it makes getting yourself up and going a lot easier
versus, oh, this isn't useful
until I have this huge standard library,
which as a burgeoning project
would have been really difficult
because you had to build a lot of code to make that happen.
- Right.
- Absolutely, I do value having it there though,
at the same time.
I understand why it would be smaller.
I just think there'd be some use cases
that it would be less of an obvious choice to use Python.
Like for example, if I just wanna script something
on my computer, knowing that it has Python,
means it has all these libraries,
where as opposed to,
if you've gotta start installing dependencies
just to get your like sort of automation scripts to run,
like there's this bootstrapping stuff that has to happen.
- Yeah, from a philosophical perspective,
we actually don't have a definition
of what the standard library is, right?
There is no pep, there is no guidance
over what the standard library is now meant for,
what it should or shouldn't have.
It simply doesn't exist.
It's always been previously based on Guido's opinion,
somewhat, and then now that's the steering council,
it's somewhat based on just kind of consensus
on the dev team and that's kind of what the steering council
will approve more or less, but there is no guidance, right?
Like, should we make it so that, as you said,
that simple automation script for managing your computer,
should that be have enough in the standard library
to make that happen?
Should we be able to have a simple HTTP server?
- Right.
- I don't know.
Should we have TK enter?
Right, where's the line?
And we don't have an answer right now.
There is a discussion going on right now,
actually over on Python Dev,
discussing this kind of thing,
because there was a proposal to potentially rip out URLLib.
I think it was partially done by Victor Sinner
to kind of not get a rise out of people,
but to kind of spark a conversation.
- Right. - And some people
were going like, okay, URLLib was written back in the day
when OSs did not necessarily ship with the network stack,
right?
And when we could plug into.
Would it be better to actually rely on the OS, right?
Do we really have to have all of that code in there
just to parse things and figure things out
to make the right HTTP requests
versus just going to macOS or going to Windows
or using curl on Linux or any Unix platform really,
and just have it handle the request?
I don't know.
But I mean, this is the kind of question
we're getting into now and we'll probably get to,
I mean, we can talk about it later.
I have one of my infamous Brett's grand plan things
around the standard library,
and this all ties into actually finally
into making that decision of
what do we want the standard library to be?
So we have better guidance for ourselves
as to where it should go,
and that's what should or should not be
in the standard library.
Now, not to spook people,
I don't know if this means we never deprecate anything
that doesn't follow this policy that's in there now,
But I would like to, at least as a core dev,
know what we want it to be for today,
compared to the cheap shipment model of useful Python
code on the internet, pre-internet.
Right.
So and Michael, you asked me about security bugs.
And so Victor's proposal, Victor's threat on Python dev
sparked by a discussion I had with Victor
on our internal communication channels,
where I pointed out that your lips actually a place where we have lots of security bugs.
And even in very trivial things like to insert like parsing like in URL, so something like
splitting up the protocol, the host, the path name, the suffix, this is not trivial.
And the way how our internal like parser works, it's written for a more forgiving and more
open world, but people also use the routines, the like,
URL open, URL parse to verify and validate
potential hostile requests that sometimes fails because we are too
open, we are too nice. So this was one of the other reasons for the discussion
of Spark and it's also a bit related to WebAssembly, but I think we can
I'll postpone that for later, but there
was an interesting interaction with how WebAssembly
or WebAssembly runtimes environments work
and what's going to work with your lib.
Yeah, and the WebAssembly discussion
also comes back to what Brett was talking about for sure
just a minute ago, so defining what is the standard library.
So I do want to come back as well to that later.
But let's talk about your PEP.
Which one of you wants to introduce PEP 594,
removing dead batteries from the Python standard library?
- Well, Christian is the original author.
I just PMed it to the finish line.
So I'll let Christian.
- Yeah, I ran out of steam and breast just pushed it,
pushed it, helped me to push it over the finish line.
- Yeah, so what's the idea here?
- The idea here is to remove things that are,
in our personal opinion, and maybe with some reasoning,
no longer super required in the modern world.
So there are especially some parts
that cost us lots of time and energy.
The most relevant library for that is NNTPlib,
so the library to interact with new servers.
We've got your--
>>Like Usenet?
>>Usenet, yeah.
Usenet.
So since we don't have a server implementation of NNTP,
so the use standard, only the client libraries,
and we need to use actual new servers for testing.
So we need to connect to some servers and do some testing.
These servers are no longer stable.
So we used to use libraries like sites like Gmain a lot
or one French new server that was stable.
but sometimes they don't work like we expect it to work.
They're sometimes just not available, or the network connection fails,
or we get issues with TLS connections.
And these issues we're having blocked our whole CI chain.
So when you do pull requests, you run your tests against Windows
and Linux on x86-64 and on also macOS.
So like think for platforms.
But once your PolarOS is merged, it also kicks off the whole buildbot farm.
There are like 20, 30, 40 different platforms that run the tests post-commit.
And any time one of the NNTP servers had a hiccup, we had like false alarms and like indicating problems somewhere,
which were not problems with the code or with the test, but rather with the infrastructure that was failing.
And it was one of the motivations why I wanted to remove NTP lib.
Sure. And how often are people depending on that these days?
One, two, who's maintaining it? There's a really interesting list you all have of like,
these are the things we want to consider to remove. There is somebody who understands and
maintains it now. A lot of them have a no for that, right?
- Yep, yeah, I mean, that's another aspect of this, right?
It was things that were failing our test suite
because the thing we had to rely on
just wasn't stable enough or available.
But our other parts were just simply,
no one wanted to step forward and say,
I will make sure that this keeps working
in modern versions of Python
and compiler errors are dealt with
and I will deal with any feature requests
and bug reports and all that, right?
'Cause the standard library before this pep
had numerically more modules
than there are countries in the world, right?
Like the standard library is that vast.
And I think, I don't even remember
if I even delved into sub modules of packages.
Like I think literally the top level
in the space is that big.
So there is a aspect here of maintainability
of just simply there are only so many core devs
to handle the influx, hence why we have 1,600 pull requests
that are currently open.
And at some point, you just have to stop and go like,
"Okay, who's benefiting from us carrying this forward
and how much of a detriment is it to the project
to keep it going?"
And some of these things, yeah, it was just a question of,
"All right, is this useful enough to the world
for us to put the effort into maintaining it
and having to make a call on some of them?"
And sometimes no one stepped forward
and sometimes some people very much step forward and say,
"I totally rely on this."
And then it became a question, it's like,
"Okay, is it just you that needs it,
or is it a large or decent enough sized chunk
of the community that still needed it,
that it warranted keeping it around
and continue to support it?"
Because I did a number crunch the other day
of certain subdirectories in the Git repo.
And if you look at just straight code
between the standard library and the interpreter,
60% of that is standard library.
- Wow. - Yeah.
- How much does it influence your feeling
and opinion about something,
whether it has some C component
or if it's just pure Python?
Is it easier to keep a pure Python thing around
that just is sort of higher level,
doesn't require as much nuance
or does it not really matter?
at least for this pep,
I don't think we really took that view specifically.
It's the management is more just a side effect almost,
but this was mainly about as the title puts it,
dead batteries.
So when Christian brought this list up initially,
it was, I don't think these are useful in modern times,
less than, oh, well, this is also written
in extension modules, which makes it harder to maintain
because you can't just ask an average Python developer
to come in and help maintain it.
you had to ask someone who knows Python
and C extension modules to come in and help maintain it.
That was never the motivation directly.
- Okay, yeah, but knowing cross-platform networking code
in C is technically, I would say,
harder than knowing standard Python.
- Oh yeah.
- Yeah, all right, let's first talk about the status.
So accepted, right, so this is happening.
- Yeah, the first PR to document the modules being removed
got committed last week.
And I now, now you all get to see the curtain pulled behind
how Python is developed.
I'm going to publicly ask Christian to review my PR
to deprecate AIFC.
I know he's busy, so.
But the first PR to actually,
maybe he reviewed it before the podcast, I don't know.
But the first PR to actually deprecate AIFC,
the first module in alphabetical order is now up.
So I'll just be cranking through them until beta.
I feel like I saw in the release notes here.
That the Python 310 four was out.
And this has deprecated various modules.
According to this pep, is that right?
Yeah, so the steering Council made the
decision that it was useful enough to.
Backport the documentation.
Deprecation so Python 311.
on 3.11 obviously, because that's going to raise a deprecation warning.
But 3.10 and 3.9 also document that these modules are deprecated,
because we didn't want people coming in in a company where they're on 3.9
at the moment, start using these modules and then be surprised
in two years time or what have you, when they upgrade to 3.11 or later
and suddenly, oh, this thing I've been using is suddenly deprecated.
Well, this went back farther than 3.10, huh?
Mm hmm. Because 3.9 is still accepting bug fixes.
Got it.
So that's what that means.
It's purely documentation.
The code is not changed at all.
It is literally just-- if you go to the module index
or any of these modules, it will just have a big deprecated term
on it.
Quick bit of nomenclature, real-time follow-up.
Mr. Hypermagnetic says, what is pure Python if not CPython?
Christian, you want to sort of disambiguate
a CPython from Python that has C?
So in Python, we--
Python channel library, we have models that don't have like
dedicated C model that just written in Python code. There
are other models that have a mandatory back end in C, like if
you look at the SSL model, which I maintain, so the binding still
must have written in C and the public facing as our model is
FSA and adds on top of the C back end. And this we would
consider as a non-Pure Python package because it requires C code. There are also other models.
We had a lot of the data structures like list and so on, right?
Yes, all the core data types are written in C.
Yeah.
But they're present always. So we'd be just talking about like
things you would import and use.
Got it. I see. Yeah.
Yeah. Then we have accelerated modules as well, like date time where they're implemented twice,
once in pure Python and once in C.
So like PyPy will use the pure Python version
or any platforms that can't compile the C code
for whatever reason.
And then there's the full C version for performance.
So pure Python basically just means the entire chunk of code
for that module that you import is written only in Python code.
There's no C code involved directly.
Obviously what you import can transiently cause that.
- For sure.
So Chris, what's the idea?
Are we just going to,
When 3.11 comes out, all the modules are just yanked?
>>At 3.30.
So at 3.11, they will--
>>What's the plan here?
It's not so immediate or so abrupt, is it?
>>No, it's going to take a couple of years.
So 3.11, you'll get the deprecation warnings,
which I think that's a plan, Brad,
to just emit a deprecation warning.
So if you would import a model and have the warnings model
enabled to show you deprecation warnings,
then you would get a warning pop up.
Even in your CI, turn the deprecation warnings
into a deprecation exception, so into a hard failure.
And then your CI would fail and inform you
that you're importing something deprecated.
And this will continue in 3.12.
And 3.13, the models are gone.
Right, OK.
So that's over basically a more or less two year period
because 3.11 is pretty imminent, right?
- Yeah, October.
So 3.13 would be October, 2024.
- Yeah, sounds far off now.
I'm sure it's not in practice.
- No.
Yeah, and to be clear, if for some reason
the community really spoke up very vocally
across a large swath of people,
we might consider postponing.
I don't think there's anything here we would not yank,
but if people need for some reason more time to move,
we might consider holding off,
but we're fairly confident that most of these aren't,
and already, honestly,
the ones that people really care about
are already getting copied and put onto PyPI.
So people can totally still get the original code.
And to be very clear,
you're already using code from Python,
which means you're already using the Python license,
the PSF license for this code.
So copy and pasting this code is totally fine,
and we encourage it if you need this code, right?
Because it's deprecated, it's not going to be changing.
Unless it flat out breaks because of some change in Python that requires an update,
this code is more or less after this deprecation lands,
that code is not getting touched,
which means you could totally copy what's in
there just prior to the deprecation or what's in 3.10 honestly,
because once again, these modules aren't really being updated.
>> These are the ones that are being basically
ignored and just dragging along anyway, right?
>> Exactly. You could totally go and copy the code over into
your own code base, paste it in,
save it under the exact same name,
and it should more or less keep working the same way.
You don't have to maintain it.
>> Yeah. There are two paths for people who are like,
"No, I really need AIFC audio file parsing or whatever that is."
>> Yeah.
>> One, somebody might decide it's really important and they
want the CPython version as a pip installable thing that you can
then add back into Python with a dependency.
That could be a possibility.
Or as you just described, you'd vendor it,
which means just copy the file and you just
have a copy of the source code internally
and it's just part of your app now.
>>Yep, exactly.
>>Oh, and IFC has an interesting back story.
So when I posted my first draft of the PEP,
I got contacted by a lead technical director
from DreamWorks Animation Studios.
Because they wanted to keep the model in CPython.
So Python is heavily used in the movie industry.
So if you see any blockbuster, it's
probably powered by Python internally.
Even so far, that Python just won a special prize
for the animation awards, the Annie's, what they're called.
>>That's right.
And Guido got that award, right?
Basically the--
Gui got the physical award, and some core devs,
including Christian, got requested certificates.
And I believe Christian's going to get it.
>> Oh, that's fantastic.
>> Yeah, the UIworks award, that's
the second guy who invented Mickey Mouse, for example.
So UIworks and Walt Disney invented Mickey Mouse together.
>> Fantastic.
That's a cool honor, and probably an unexpected one
from working on Python?
- Yeah, I mean, Christian and I have been doing this
long enough that, I mean, I think I've mentioned this
on the podcast, when I first got involved
in as a core dev of Python, I still had to explain
to people what Python even was, right?
Or if I was lucky enough, they knew what it was,
they just would go, is that the language
where white space matters, right?
- Yeah, is that the one that's weird?
- Yeah, so it was a totally different time.
And now we're being used to help power helicopters
helicopters that help plan flight paths for helicopters on Mars and having the video of
the lander that made that helicopter take off and processing images of black holes and
gravitational waves.
>> I just had a...
>> Your JWST episode that I haven't gotten to listen to.
Yeah, it's nuts.
So, no, I never thought any of this would ever happen.
So yeah, having Blockbuster movies have their entire, like, management pipeline for their
assets written in Python.
It's always mind boggling where Python is and what it's
powering.
I mean--
That's cool.
It's not just all your cat videos and photos
on Instagram anymore.
Or videos on YouTube.
Yeah, it's both amazing and par for the course.
Yeah.
And I can't believe I just said, it's not just Instagram
and YouTube anymore.
We've also been there long enough that people
realize we power huge websites.
Yeah, absolutely.
Lots of stuff in the world.
You know, it's a YouTube constantly.
Yeah, YouTube was originally written in Python.
I think it's still lots of parts of YouTube
are powered by Python.
From my understanding.
- Last time I spoke with someone there, it was, yeah.
- Yep.
- Sydney out in the audience has an interesting question.
Like, so there's a list of things that are deprecated here.
Some that were threatened, but kept.
You know, they were on the list
and then they were just like, "Ah, maybe not."
Sydney asks, "Might there be
further removals in the future?"
- Maybe.
So here's the deal.
This pep was done because Christian,
I personally think rightfully so,
thought we needed to do a bit of house cleaning
and get rid of some stuff that was just kind of
just sitting there rotting in the corner and not being loved.
Some things got kept because to keep the controversy low,
Christian was very conservative with the list.
And basically if anyone stepped forward and saying,
no, no, please don't take that out,
that was a core dev, it more or less just got left.
Very few things are on this list that people still
pushed back and said, we're removing it
even if Core Dev wanted to keep it.
That being said, as I said earlier in this podcast,
right, like Brett's crazy grand plan here
is, was to help Christian get this pep done,
get initial clean done.
I've started a conversation over on Python Committers
about how to maintain the standard library, right?
Like what does it take to add a module
and to remove a module?
Because that's actually not very clearly stated either.
It's been very just kind of open, right?
- My perspective from the outside of what defines
the standard module is just, it's right only,
like stuff only gets added and it's defined to be
what's in the shipping version of Python, right?
I mean, that's kind of an implicit definition.
- Right, but how do you get something in there?
Right, like, did you know that Graphlib was added
by a couple of core devs just 'cause they thought
it was a good idea?
- Yeah.
No one asked the string counts or anything.
That's how it's been historically maintained.
It's very much just an open thing.
And there's a proposal to make it a bit more structured
and you could argue more rigid depending on your view of this whole process.
- More modern, maybe. - Maybe.
By suggesting that you need a pep to add something
because it's a shared cost to all the core devs that we have to maintain it.
You'll notice I have a slight theme here of maintenance cost.
>>Victor: I have a puppy for you.
[LAUGHTER]
>>Grayson: One that's fluffier, one that I'm
going to have to pay vet bills for.
>>Victor: A boy.
>>Victor: He might ruin your carpet,
but it's also cute, so you'll like it.
>>Grayson: Yeah.
I've got a cat.
I'm good.
So if you don't know this, it's not the joke.
So I've just watched Brad's keynote from PyCon
like three or four years ago.
>>Victor: Yeah, I think 2019 maybe.
>>Grayson: It was the first one in Cleveland,
whichever one that one is.
>>Victor: 2018, I think.
I think it's 18.
- Yeah.
- Anyway, once that's settled,
my hope is once again,
come up with a policy
of what that means for the standard library.
Once we have that policy,
there will probably be a discussion
about what does that mean for the current standard library?
Do we leave it as is?
Do we maybe slowly transition over or not?
I don't know.
Some people like Lukasz, for instance,
have advocated never removing anything
from the standard library ever again.
And literally just saying, this is deprecated,
We will never touch it or update it.
It's dead, but it's sitting here so we don't break the code.
Other people are way more, let's strip it to its bones.
And if you need this stuff, we'll
make it as a separate package or something.
Some people have talked about keeping it as is,
but separating the development process.
So it's actually an externally maintained thing,
and it has its own release process, and schedule,
and all that.
The answer is, I don't know.
But this is not the first time I've deprecated modules
and had them removed.
I was also in a competition with Fred Drake
back in the two to three transition
to see who could remove the most number of lines of code
in Python and I won thanks to removing the compiler package.
So I have been around long enough to say,
probably, I just don't know when.
Just 'cause I will never say never
when it comes to a project that's 32 years old.
But there are no specific plans right now
outside of this pep of deprecating
or removing anything else from the standard library.
So if that's the question concretely, no plans.
But philosophically, I am not willing to say--
- Never say never, yeah.
So one of the things that stands out,
let's talk about the modules real quick.
Then I wanna kind of talk a broader thing
'cause I think it's gonna lead us down a path.
So maybe just give us a quick overview
of the highlights, let's say, of things being removed.
I talked about this table here
"under the deprecated modules heading on the pep
"and it has a module name, when it's deprecated."
Some of them are like deprecated in 3.6,
when it's to be removed, when it was added,
whether as a maintainer.
And interestingly, I thought this was cool.
There's an alternative that's new or better maintained
that you could just use, right?
- Yes.
So yeah, I mean, and if you look at the table,
You'll know some of the stuff's actually been somewhat
documented as deprecated all the way back to Python 2.0
or 3, right?
Like you also have to understand some of the stuff
got documented as don't use anymore.
A long time ago, we just didn't take the code out.
And this is more of a push to actually finally remove
the code in the documentation.
- I see.
- But yeah, so we have AIFC,
which I believe is the audio format.
- Correct.
- We have AsyncChad and AsyncCore,
which were very early async server things
in the standard library that you shouldn't use,
obviously, 'cause it's on this list.
- Yeah, and alternative is async.io,
which was added in 3.4 and is active.
- Yeah, it's actually asynchronous.
- I think the async check,
I think core were added for Zope back in the day.
I know that the Zope server used to use
async core async check a lot.
I mean, I don't even remember what the hell Audio Op is.
Audio Op is low level conversion and math operations
used by IFC Wave and some of the other sound models.
So this just provides math primitives in C.
>>CGI is literally what it sounds like.
It's helpers to write CGI scripts.
>>That sounded like one of the bigger, harder
to work with ones.
Like there's no maintainer that was designed at a different time.
Yeah, and the funny thing though is a lot of packages
still use bits of it because there's weird little helpers in there.
But if you also go look in what the helpers are doing,
most of them are either a one-liner
or they delegate to something else, somewhere else in the standard library at this point.
And they have horrible APIs now because they very much expect it to be CGI.
So they're reading from environment variables and files
to get the things to process versus passing them as an argument.
From STD in and STD out.
So pretty much hot code STD in and STD out.
Yeah, so there was actual pushback on CGI,
but I think when we pointed out, like, this just delegates to here,
or this is literally a one-liner that I can paste in
when you're in the discussion of what it does,
like just copy and paste this regex, literally.
And or just whatever.
Most people, I think, were OK with it.
This is actually, I think, one of the first modules
to get put up on PyPI a couple weeks ago.
CGI TV is tracebacks, pretty tracebacks in your CGI code.
I mean, if you don't have CGI code, you can use tracebacks.
>> One goes, the other comes with it.
>> Yeah, chunk, I think, is literally just chunking data.
It's literally just breaking up into chunks.
>> A little bit like inner tools.
>> Yeah, I think so, if I remember correctly.
- I would like to see a format to distribute files
like used by mailboxes or so, if I remember correctly.
Yeah.
- Yeah.
I will let Christian talk about Crypt.
- Yeah, Crypt is a binding to the ellipses.
Crypt function is used to password hashing,
a way around.
The problem with that is that the only guaranteed
algorithm available is horrible.
And if you need some of the better ones,
they're probably not available in your web C.
So there's like optional algorithms for password hashing
and even there are problematic.
So use one of these replacement ones.
So yeah, they're much better.
- Yeah, like Encrypt or PassLib or anything else
that's doing it right.
- Yeah, that's correct.
- Yeah, and the image shatter is just a very limited
approach to detect if you have a PNG, GIF, JPEG, whatever,
based on the first couple of bytes of a file.
It's just the same with audio headers, sound headers.
They just detect file formats,
but they only support a very limited setup file formats.
And there are better libraries that are more efficient
and support much more different file formats.
- Yeah, so after image headers, MSI lib,
which helps with Windows MSI installers.
Okay, why do we have this in standard library?
kind of question.
I think we did originally to help write
the installer for Windows and use it anymore.
So it's not a big deal.
We already talked about NNTPlib, NIST.
Who still uses NIST?
>> Sun Yellow Pages.
>> Yeah, exactly.
Do people even know what Sun is anymore?
Getting to that point in our lives.
>> I think it's a synonym for Oracle.
>> Yeah, exactly.
OSS Audio Dev is just a wrapper and an audio library.
Once again, does that really belong in the standard library?
Yeah, it was used by Linux before they had AltSAR,
before they had PulseAudio and Pipewire.
So this is from the early 2000s.
The Pipes library more or less got replaced by a subprocess,
so it's literally just Unix pipes.
SMTPD, I don't think we need to be able to run a server
to send email in Python to standard library.
So that's why that's there.
>> Yeah, and there's a PyPI alternatives.
>> Yeah, send header,
because you already talked about,
SPWD is the binding to the etc shadow file.
So that's the place where Linux actually keeps
the passwords for users, but that's the wrong approach.
So if you want to log in a user,
you don't check the password,
You ask the PAM stack if the user's allowed to log into a service.
And yeah.
SunAU is another audio format from Sun.
So Telnet lib, yeah, Telnet server.
This was specifically to be a server, not a client of Telnet?
It's our client library.
Sorry, the client library.
So I don't think you have a server, but actually I would have to open the code,
to read the code.
UU, that was used by UUCP.
So Unix to Unix copy,
that's the chunking format to transfer binary data.
And XCRLib, another Sun library,
that is the binary format used by NFS.
And remote procedure calls.
If you have like Sun remote procedure calls
for network fault servers.
from 1992, indeed.
There's an interesting high frequency
of sun being mentioned here.
- Yeah, I mean, Python used to run cleanly
on Solaris right out of the box.
- Yeah.
- And Sun developed lots of internet standards
we still use these days.
- Sure, for sure.
- So hopefully all the listeners were shocked
and had no clue any of these modules existed
and hence why we're getting rid of them.
(laughing)
- Where's the threatened list?
It's down here somewhere.
- The modules to keep.
So we've got color sys, file input, get opt,
opt pars and wave.
Those are the ones that avoided being cut.
- Color sys, to be frank is just basic math.
It's nothing special, but the core dev said,
I'll use it, I'll keep it around, I'll maintain it.
I'll be okay.
I don't remember about file input.
I think someone just said I use it.
GetOpt and OptParse were once again,
is it worth getting rid of versus AugParse?
And is it widely used enough?
And it was just one of these--
there's just too much code out there right now
to warrant ripping it out.
So we just said it's easier to keep.
And Wave plays WAV sound files.
And basically, it's used by education.
It's a quick and cheap tool to show kids computers
can do fancy stuff like make noise.
- Oh yeah.
Yeah, that's actually really nice
if you've got your turtle moving along,
it could laugh when it gets to the end
of its little thing or whatever, right?
- Yeah.
But I mean, that's another good point, Michael.
Like, oh, turtle.
Well, that relies on a shipping TK enter,
which requires a shipping Tickle TK,
and it's just like, where do you draw the line?
Yeah, I mean.
- But it's turtles all the way down, you know that.
(laughing)
- Hey, and as someone who learned turtle back
on an Apple IIe with a good old green and black screen.
Like I totally get it, but these are the questions
we're starting to ask ourselves, right?
Like, where's the line?
- Yeah, indeed.
All right, before we run out of time,
let's have a broader philosophical conversation
on all this stuff.
You said you have a big plan.
You know, one of the things that I think
is interesting about Python is where it runs
in all these different places.
I mean, you've got Mac, Windows, Linux,
but you also got Raspberry Pis, you've got helicopters,
you've got robots, and then you even have, you know,
Circuit, CircuitPython and MicroPython,
where it's like really, really small.
And I do think it would be interesting to say,
here is a subset, a portion of Python
and a portion of maybe even the language syntax
that if you program to this,
you're guaranteed to be able to run it everywhere.
Right, is there a way to agree?
Maybe that compiles to WebAssembly
and runs in the front end on a browser, who knows?
- So for any of you who read my blog,
you'll know I've been doing a long running blog post series
on the syntactic sugar of Python.
And part of the reason I've been doing that
is I've been, and you'll find out more
when I write the concluding post about this,
but basically I've been trying to figure out
what I've mentally been calling the minimum viable Python.
What is the core set of Python constructs
that must exist to basically reconstitute
all the other parts of Python in its syntax.
And kind of, if we were to start from scratch almost,
what would that look like?
Now that's interesting from a language level,
but from a standard library level,
that comes into play only in terms of support, right?
Like we dropped this feature, would that break things?
Right?
- Right, well, for example,
does TK enter need to be
in the WebAssembly front end version?
Probably not, right?
- I guess not, but maybe, probably not.
- Yeah, I mean, that's the tricky question, right?
It's always one of these things of
who are you optimizing for?
Who's the target audience?
How do you define that, right?
Like other than stuff that we have to have
just to make CPython run,
nothing technically has to be in there, right?
Some have said, oh, we should have enough
to at least bootstrap in pip.
So if you can at least get pip or some installer in,
you can then at least get yourself going
and start installing dependencies.
- Yeah, absolutely.
- But as you mentioned earlier,
like it's nice to be able to also write
that little automation script
that helps maintain your system
and not have to pull anything
and have to create a virtual environment
for every little script you ever write.
- When I install, yeah, when I saw Python on Linux
on just like a bare server,
I can apt install Python three,
but maybe that's not enough.
maybe I need to also install sometimes Python 3-VENV
or it's like broken up into bits, right?
- The Debian question is a very hot topic
with Christian in the room.
(laughing)
But I personally argue against Debian's policy on that
and say VIM would be considered core part, right?
- I think it's core as well.
And I wasn't so much picking on VIM as just like,
there are environments where it comes in pieces.
to some degree, like that.
>>Christian, what are you going to say about this?
>>So this is a -- okay, I need to find the right words to not
get into trouble again.
Or to get into -- last time I was a bit uncareful, somebody
accused me to wage a crusade against Debian.
>>It's a philosophical disagreement.
Disagreement. So Debian has policies to split packages in smaller parts so they can have a
minimal installation and they also don't like the way how we have like virtual amphibian provided
because it's actually duplicating code. We have like a zip file of binary wields with
compressed setup tools and pip which contains vendor packages but Debian wants to use their
their own distribution provided version of PIP.
So this is a conflict.
And like we from the parts of the core developers,
we think that the usability is more important here.
So we want users to be able to use standard documentation
and instructions to use Python install extensions.
This is more important for us.
And this is a debate which had multiple session
between Debian engineers and the steering council.
There was several heated discussions.
And yeah, there are just different philosophical
intentions.
>>So I mean, the key point is there
are a lot of questions about if you start to slice and dice
the standard library into parts that you can install
in groupings, for instance,
is that truly part of the standard library
or is that just an optional install on PyPI
that the core dev team just happens to maintain, right?
'Cause you can no longer rely on it.
- Yeah, I mean, if you went down that path,
it would almost be a little bit like the Anaconda story,
right, like here's the essence of what I got,
but if I install what I normally install, I get more,
you know, there'd be like a minimum install
and like a fuller install, which I think,
I don't know how I feel about that.
But for some parts--
>> Well, it--
>> -- on the front end, I don't have to write JavaScript.
I feel pretty good about it, I'm starting to think.
I don't know.
>> Well, for some part, it makes kind of sense.
So let's go back to Tkinter.
So Tkinter depends on TclTk, which depends on your graphical user interface.
So x11.
And if Python would always require Tcl/Tk,
then you would have to install,
I guess like 100 megabytes of libraries
on every container image that has Python
because the whole X11 stack is very big.
So you get your whole like graphical user interface libraries
down to the actual graphical server
that renders all the output.
So it makes sense that most Linux distros split up
to counter and ship that optional package.
But some distros go a bit further and split off packages
that we consider to be core core packages.
So the inner core,
that should be always available and working--
- Like intime and tuples and stuff like that.
- Stuff that has no third party dependencies basically.
- Okay.
Okay, interesting.
What about WebAssembly?
You guys started actually building for WebAssembly, didn't you?
I feel like--
>> Yes.
>> Steve Dower pointed out that I don't remember the way to look it up super easy, but that
that there's sort of a proper core dev version of WebAssembly
CPython now.
It's REPL_EASEN_HSME.
I just posted in the chat with the chat window.
Yeah, basically what happened was that the core dev sprints
back in October, I started to look
at seeing what it would take to compile CPython to WebAssembly.
And I was lamenting in our build channel on our Core Dev Discord
server that, all right, the build setup
was kind of old and creaky.
And I needed some help to figure out what to do.
And then Christian, working for Linux distribution,
knows how all this stuff works.
And so he started answering my questions.
And I did some initial cleanup.
And then Christian really got into it
and just totally really started to clean up
our entire build process in terms of modules and such.
because there's a setup file in the repo
where you can specify what modules you do or don't want built in to Python,
both compiled at all into a .so or DLL,
compiled into statically into the binary, or just completely left out.
And Christian went through with some help with Erland, I think, actually.
- Yeah, Erland. - And cleaned up a bunch of the whole structure
so that we were using more of PKG, config,
and just made it a bit more modern.
And while he was doing that,
Christian would bring up stuff about cross compilation,
because that's another thing we do, is you do a cross build.
You can build, I mean, you can totally build on your Mac right now, Michael,
for x86, 64-bit, even though you're running an M1.
Oh, interesting. Okay.
- So it's just flags to the compiler. - That's pretty wild, yeah.
But the way you get WebAssembly building that way
is you just specify, typically in scripting,
as a C compiler, which basically is Clang.
And you just specify it.
And basically under the hood, it's more or less just specifying
the right flags and everything to just make Clang
build for a different CPU target.
And then Christian was starting to talk about, like,
"Oh, well, for cross builds, can we do this and that?"
And I kept saying, "No, it won't work for WebAssembly
because of this, and it won't work for WebAssembly because of that."
And then Christian just looked into it and was like,
"Oh, I'll use this as a motivator." And then Christian just ran with it.
And Christian figured out all the problems
and just got really into it. And it's been patching
CPython's main over and over to the point that as of
I don't know, less than a month ago.
So for two weeks now we can run the entire test suite without any faders.
On WebAssembly?
Yep, on inside Node.js.
So you compile the...
So, we said a bit earlier, so when you
build Python for WebAssembly, you have to not only tag WebAssembly
but also the runtime.
So these things are called triplets,
so platform triplets.
You have which CPU you target, which vendor and operating system,
and additional flags like glibc.
And the default target is a Wedum32 mscripten,
so you do compile to WebAssembly,
CPU instruction for 32-bits,
And Emscripten is the runtime platform.
And Emscripten can target multiple different platforms.
So this is Emscripten for the browser,
but you can also compile it that it uses Node.js backends
and Node.js file system access.
So we can actually--
I have more permissions and more capabilities, right?
You can run threads, you can run sockets in a limited way,
and you can access the file system.
And so it was a process of running the test suite,
figuring out why it's crashing.
So we had in the beginning,
like this completely like really crushing the runtime.
So not just itself,
but there's like a virtual kernel layer
written in JavaScript that provides sys calls
written in JavaScript to the WebAssembly model.
It's a bit weird.
So I was writing kernel-like code in JavaScript
and the unit test code for that in C.
So it's actually--
- Yeah, so this a repl.ethanhs.me,
which I'll put in the show notes,
it's got my in scripting version of Python 3.11
and I can do F string stuff
and the thing that's right here in the browser.
It hasn't been updated in a while.
It's a bit old.
It's like six weeks old.
That's old for the web, I guess.
Well, I mean, we have a cron job running on Ethan's GitHub repo
for this that runs nightly against Python,
CPython itself to make sure it continues to compile.
We need to get a build bot coin.
Microsoft has agreed to fund one via Azure.
And just, we have to get it to a,
I haven't talked to Christian about it yet,
but we'll figure out getting a build bot going.
And then where I,
the part of one of Brett's crazy grand plans
around Python WebAssembly,
is we're defining an official platform support
for CPython right now for in PEP 11.
And my hope is we're going to get it
so that Christian and I are listed as the maintainers
of the WebAssembly support in CPython,
and we'll get it listed as an official tier two,
what we're calling a tier two supported platform,
which basically means it's backed by two core devs,
at least, and a build bot.
But the idea of tier one is something
the entire core team supports
and is based on continuous integration.
But one of the funny things-- - That's really exciting.
- Yeah, well, one of the actually nice things
about WebAssembly is we could theoretically
even get that to a tier one,
because WebAssembly is an abstracted assembly language,
but it's not CPU dependent.
So we could actually compile it on GitHub Actions
and test on that just as equally as Mac, Windows, or Linux,
and have it still be fully tested and work on CI.
And you can take this idea really far.
Suddenly, we could start having executable code examples
in the documentation for Python.
We've got a runtime now.
You don't have to worry about security or compute costs
because you have yourself in it.
It's your compute.
Selfishly for me at work, when this works,
I can start talking about shipping the node version of this
with the Python extension for VS Code or as its own extension.
So like you have Python installed, install this other extension
that's going to come with Python compiled to WebAssembly,
and you'll just have it.
Or VS Code.dev browser version.
We could potentially start shipping that with VS Code.dev
and have the Python extension pull that in.
And now you'll even have a runtime in the browser
that ties into what I think is a nice editor.
So there's a lot of possibilities here
that we really hope to get going with.
And then when you start talking about Wazzy,
then you start to get to Edge Compute.
Christian just got that working
literally, I think, last week.
I don't know where it stands yet.
- Working again. So the first version
was hacking
and patching lots of things out.
- Oh, yeah. - And the new version
a week ago was using
a library from a
company that's also working on Python support
and they have dubs
and hacks. Single-source labs, right? Single-source labs, yep. So Wazzy is even more
restricted and limited compared to Wazzy and MScript then. So you don't have any
support for threading, but you can't compile Python without at least the
threading library headers and they just had like workarounds for that too. So you
can't spawn thread. So if you try to start a thread, you just fail.
but at least you have enough of the C API available to compile Python.
Right.
Little bits and pieces.
And that's super exciting.
Yeah.
Just to be clear on that, it's not a completely new effort.
There's actually a productive version of Python for rep assembly in the browser called Pyodite.
Yeah.
And which is also now used by JupyterLite.
So Jupyter Lite is Jupyter Notebooks on top of Pyodite.
- And that's working really well. - Yeah, Jupyter Lite is looking really interesting.
Yeah, and we actually met with the Pyodite team,
and more or less what we came to an agreement,
seems a little weird to phrase it this way,
but basically an agreement where we will keep trying to make it
so that the main branch in CPython can compile cleanly to WebAssembly,
And that frees them to focus on a JavaScript API to tie into it
and on getting the scientific stack compiled over to WebAssembly.
You've got to compile like Matplotlib and stuff because it's got C in it.
So you've got to compile it over there.
Or I don't know, some of those like NumPy definitely does.
Exactly, because traditionally, they had to do all the patches
and all the work, every Python release to get it working.
And Christian and I are just in a better position to be able to keep that up and going.
So we just said, let us handle that part.
You don't have to worry about patching anymore.
and you can focus on the stuff that's more unique to WebAssembly
and what you're able to be good at over there.
So that's where we're divvying up the workload here,
is we're just going to keep main working,
and then they get to stop worrying about that
once they start worrying about Python 3.11.
Yeah, so one of the first things that Ethan and I did
just we took the patches that were developed by PyLite developers
and adjusted them and made them compatible
so we can actually merge them and have them in the upstream code.
So lots of their patches was just replacing things,
but not in a way that would work
if you would build the same source code for standard Python.
So they just hacking around and getting things working,
which is totally okay for their approach,
but we couldn't just take their pull requests
and their-- - Right, they had a much
narrower-- - So we had to make them
in a way that would work for standard Python
and WebAssembly Python.
- Yeah. - Yeah.
- Fantastic, well, two things spring to mind for me
when I hear this one is,
does this mean I could write electron apps
and just have the slightest shim
that then just lets me run like a backend in Python,
you know, the sort of Node.js side of that in Python,
which would be awesome.
- It should because electron chips with Node.
So as long as you're back to Node runtime.
- Right, exactly.
You just get the Node version.
Yeah, and you just get it on top of there.
And then instead of writing all your,
your sort of core logic of your app.
You'll have to shim out back to JavaScript appropriately
and have those APIs, which you might want
Pyrodite for potentially.
But yeah, basically, yes, that door is open.
Yeah, that's cool.
I don't know Electron.js well enough to say,
oh, I could totally just go do that.
But I see that as a possibility that would be awesome.
So what we don't have and probably won't add
in the near future is any kind of bindings to JavaScript.
So you can run Python in a web browser
as like an isolated process or worker,
but communication back and forth
between like the outside world in the Node.js
or router world and Python,
that's provided by Pyodide, but we don't have that.
- Right, right, right, right.
Yeah, it's totally fine. - So there's a very fun
and great talk by Katie Bell.
She also helped us to kickstart the port.
She gave a talk at PyCon AU a couple of months ago.
It was like 10 minutes introduction,
two minutes compiling Python to WebAssembly
and 28 minutes get STD in working.
So just STD in, STD out working
took like half an hour of our talk
because that's surprisingly, surprisingly hard
with WebAssembly.
- We kind of made the decision that at least for now
we are not interested in trying to develop that FFI
back and forth with JavaScript
and having that opinionated API.
And that's, as I said, kind of the agreement
we've come up with PyData right now
is they already have an API.
We're gonna lean on them to provide that for now at least.
And probably will continuously.
I don't really necessarily see us changing this.
And we'll just provide the lower level functionality
of just the runtime.
- Right, yeah.
But if you all build that,
it's a great foundation for other people to run with.
- Exactly.
- Yeah, and then the other one,
but first of all, is this the talk
that you're talking about?
- Yes, that's the one.
- Okay, I'll put that in the show notes.
The other one is,
sorry URL.
Is this a Blazor project from the C#.net team?
- Yep.
- This is .net, the .net runtime
as a front end framework running in the browser,
which is pretty awesome.
And it seems like there's just so many parallels
that could be brought to the Python world
that like you don't have to do Angular,
you can just do PyBlazer.
I mean, that's not the name.
You know what I'm saying?
Like it's closer to possible.
And I think this is actually something
that would be really neat.
- Yes, the trick here,
and I think Blazer does the same thing right now as well,
is from my understanding,
Blazor has a WebAssembly compiled .NET runtime
that gets loaded into the client.
- Yeah.
- And then that's how it does the execution,
if I understand how Blazor works correctly.
And so you could do a theoretical same thing with Python.
Now, obviously there is size issues to consider here, right?
Like this is not something you necessarily
on a really slow connection somewhere
would want to actually pull down,
'cause I think the runtime,
is it five megs now, Christian, or is it three?
So the uncompressed WASM is like six megabytes,
gets down to like four,
and then you have the big bundle of the data file
that contains the Python compiled files.
It's another five or six MB.
It's big, but actually it's smaller.
Okay, three MB.
Can you scroll up a bit?
The .data file, it's the standard library.
- Did I hear all that?
And then group tab, and it's Python data and Python
weapon.
So yeah, so--
Yeah, so it's 3 megs for the standard library,
212 kilobytes for the wrapper.
And you've already cached the Wasm.
So it's probably--
Yeah, I got it.
Like 6 MB.
So we can probably make it a bit smaller.
So currently, that comes like with elementary
and decimal model and all the hashing libraries
compiled in.
So we currently create one gigantic binary.
There are ways to have side models like shared libraries
with Wasm, it's a bit more complicated to get that right.
And also it increases the size of the main binary,
the main model a bit.
I didn't go into that yet.
That's something I will look into maybe in the future.
But as you were talking about earlier, Michael,
about slicing and dicing the standard library,
if you're shipping the runtime, you can also shrink that down
by just dropping all the parts of the standard library you don't need.
So if you run like module finder or some other script
that's going to go through the standard library
to figure out what you do and don't need,
you could actually just compile your own version of CPython for WebAssembly
only with the standard library that you want.
- Interesting, you get it really small, right?
So which of these three, PythonJS, PythonData,
and Python.Wasm is the, has c, a val.c in it?
- Wasm. - The Wasm one.
Okay, so that's two megs
and then plus the standard library bits, right?
- Yeah, so it's a little over five megs
in total for everything.
- Yeah. - Which isn't huge,
like an intranet project that you might need,
or totally fine for Electron.
- It would be totally fine for a single page app.
It'd be fine for Gmail.
- Yeah, so you're gonna leave up
- It's been running constantly and not changed, yeah.
It's within the realm of probably what Facebook's
already downloading onto your machine right now anyway.
- Just run an ad blocker, you'll do less.
(laughing)
All right, I think we are well over time,
but you guys, it's always great to talk to you.
Yeah, good work.
I dream of PyBlazer happening,
and I also saw a nice, interesting comment
that triggered a thought.
Progressive web apps are not really a thing
we can do in Python very well,
because for a progressive web app,
it's really gotta be all offline in some meaningful way.
But if you could bring Python.Wasm down,
maybe use local DB,
there might be some really interesting ways
that progressive web apps become way more interesting
to us as Python web developers.
- Okay, now I have to confess,
I have no clue what a progressive web app is.
I don't know anything about intellectual web development.
So I got Python working on the browser,
but I don't know how browsers work.
- Awesome.
- I will give one last tease though, Michael.
I had two motivations for getting
into this whole WebAssembly thing.
Browser, mobile.
'Cause every phone has a WebAssembly runtime,
thanks to all of them shipping with the browser.
- Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Okay, now I'm also very interested.
I would rather have a mobile option
than a offline, than a front-end web option.
So there we have it.
Although these may well go together, honestly.
Yeah, all right.
Well, thank you both for your hard work on this PEP.
And then it's super interesting to see how it kind of ties back
into this more focused runtimes and more places.
- Yeah.
All right, before you get out of here, really quick,
last question I'm gonna ask you.
I'll just keep to one,
since I kind of know the answers for the other,
I'm pretty sure.
Anyway, notable PyPI package you want to give a shout out to
before we dip.
- Oh man.
- There's one that runs WebAssembly,
like something you can have like Python
that'll basically interoperate with any WebAssembly one.
I can't remember quite what that was called though.
- I think WasmTime has one.
- Yeah, okay.
- There's a couple.
There's a couple of people who've posted stuff to PyPI
that you load WebAssembly code and actually run them.
And I think Wasm Time might be one of them.
Wasm Time is a WebAssembly runtime run by the Bytecode
Alliance, and it's usually the most cutting edge of all of
them.
So if anyone wants to play with this and looking for a runtime,
Wasm Time is probably a good one.
But yeah, it looks like they also have a--
>>I thought they had a Wasm Time.
>>We have the Python plugin, yeah.
>>And you can ask Christian what his favorite editor is.
>>Yeah.
>>The right one, the good one.
>>Yeah, go ahead.
- I use a couple.
To,
I use a bunch of them, I use VS Code to use them.
So depending on my needs.
- Yeah, you've got a whole survey,
the whole spectrum there, that's awesome.
Cool, and then a notable package
you wanna give a quick shout out to before we get here?
- It's already late, I don't know.
The Python Standard Library.
The lack of certain things in the standard library,
it's like an anti-module.
The fact that you guys are taking them out, right?
- Oh, the anti-gravity model is also fun.
- Oh yeah, sure, all right.
Anti-gravity, pip install, anti-gravity.
Now--
- Maybe it's in the standard library.
- I'm gonna give you all up here on the WebAssembly one.
- That would not work.
(laughs)
- Let's go, no module anti-gravity.
- Because that requires the browser model,
which requires the subprocess.
So you can't run any processes.
So it's--
>>I know, I'm just teasing.
I tried to-- for people to see, I tried to import anti-gravity
inside the WASM REPL.
It didn't do it.
>>Not yet.
>>Not yet, not yet.
>>I wonder if Pyre.
Do I can do it?
>>I don't know.
Maybe.
Maybe you can.
Should.
They all should.
All right, you guys.
Thank you so much for being here.
I'm excited to see this progressing.
I see it leading to good places.
>>Thanks for having us, Michael.
>>Yep.
You bet.
Bye.
>>Bye-bye.
See ya.
[BLANK_AUDIO]